okay good morning everyone let's dive uh
right in you're working on various
assignments any questions about the
assignments everything flowing
relatively
smoothly okay all right so we are going
to finish up uh this morning we are
going to finish up lecture six on
physical simulation which will finish up
our second theme on tools of the trade
um any talk about one of the quiz
answers let's talk about one of the quiz
answers go for it yes for the for the
collisions one why was there a plus one
in the answer if we were ignoring the
ground why was there a plus one there's
one additional Collision that needs to
be detected in addition to the 3 * 2 / 2
and the 4 * 3 / two between the two
groups between the two groups that's why
Collision groups exist most of the time
assuming this group is relatively far
from this group there only needs to be
one Collision detection which is between
the pair of bounding boxes around the
collisions which is the Collision group
as long as these two boxes don't Collide
none of these collisions need to be
computed that's why it was a bit of a
trick question on Tuesday my apologies
okay just to make sure you're paying
attention another question I should ask
can um talk about the dimensionality
question
from sure yeah the dimensionality
question so there was a question on the
quiz from last week about Fitness
Landscapes remember that the fitness
landscape is a way to sort of visualize
as best you can how an evolutionary
process occurs it was originally
formulated back in the 30s to actually
think about biological evolving
populations we can use it when we're
talking about evolutionary robotics or
evolutionary algorithms the idea in a
fitness landscape is usually it exists
in a high dimensional space so it gets a
little difficult to actually visualize
it when we're talking about large
dimensions but imagine a space in uh in
high Dimensions where every quote
unquote horizontal dimension in three
dimensions there's two horizontal
dimensions and one vertical Dimension
each horizontal Dimension corresponds to
one element in your genotype if we're
talking about DNA that's individual
nucleotides if we're talking about
vectors of numbers that encode synaptic
weights for robot's neural controller
we're talking about each element in that
Vector if you're running an evolutionary
algorithm with a genotype encoded as a
vector and that Vector has length n
there are n horizontal dimensions in the
fitness landscape so far so good yeah
was
a
like
different mot synops
and all them count
ases all of the all of the parts of the
phenotype for the brenberg vehicle count
that are encoded in the genotype so if
we're fixing the sensors and motors and
then we're connecting up this sensor to
that motor with the synapse that synapse
has a weight associated with it and
that's what we're encoding in the
genotype for the moment so if we have
two sensors
and four Motors and we're wiring up
every sensor to every motor we've got 2
* 4 total synapses eight total synapses
which is eight synaptic weights imagine
we take those eight numbers and embed
them in a vector that's our genotype
we're encoding eight numbers for those
eight synapses the corresponding Fitness
landscape has eight horizontal
Dimensions right if we go to any point
in that eight dimensional space that
point is is represented by eight
coordinates in space that point in that
horizontal space represents one and only
one genotype the particular settings or
values for those eight synapses we take
those eight synapses we run it on the
brenberg vehicle we see how well the
brenberg vehicle does at whatever it is
we want it to do and that number that
comes back from the Fitness function how
well the robot did with those set of
eight synaptic weights is the ninth
Dimension it's the height of that
point so in a two sensor four motor
brenberg vehicle we would have a fitness
landscape that exists in nine
Dimensions make sense um any you could
really quickly difference between
genotype and phenotype difference
between genotype and phenotype genotype
is a catchall term for where the
information is encoded in us that's uh
that's your DNA in the the case of the
brenberg vehicle we just talked about
the genotype is the vector we talked
about genetic programming a particular
type of evolutionary algorithm last time
the genotypes in genetic programming are
encoded as trees yeah the phenotype is
when you take those numbers or that data
that's stored in the genotype and you
translate it into something and you make
that thing go and then you measure how
well that thing does at whatever you
want it to do that thing is the
phenotype phenotype normally refers to
Form and Function your particular form
and your function whatever it is that
you do in most every evolutionary
algorithm we're going to see you're
applying the fitness function to the
phenotype the robot how well it does and
actually we're going to talk about two
of the first evolutionary robotics
experiments today and you're going to
see some different
phenotypes all good any other clarifying
questions thanks for ask asking them I
want to make sure we're all on the same
page as we move
forward okay all right so back to tools
of the trade and physical uh simulation
uh we ended last time by talking about
collisions yeah uh actually you're right
we talked about collisions we ended last
time by talking about Collision
detection just what happens when a
collision event happens in most physical
uh simulators there's some event-based
programming means meaning that your prog
your computer's attention jumps to a
particular point of code whenever a
collision
occurs now we're going to talk about
Collision resolution which is how does
the computer how does the physics engine
resolve a collision once a collision has
happened what does it do okay first
thing it does is check to see whether
pairs of objects that have hit one
another are supposed to be in contact
with one another or not if they're
connected by a joint ignore that
Collision event if they are not attached
with a joint the physical simulation is
going to have to try and resolve that
Collision the way in which different
physics engines resolve collisions is
different we're really getting down into
the engine room of physics engines now
so I'm going to just sort of give you
the basic intuition for how this works
and again you can ignore the code but
for those of you that are really
interested in physics you can dig into
the code a little bit to see how this
works let's imagine we've got these two
cubes like uh the cubes in your Tower
from assignment one or
two the physics engine has detected that
these two cubes have come into contact
with one another the intuition is very
much like uh what we talked about last
week when a sphere is falling and comes
into contact with the ground the physics
engine detects that collision between an
object in the
ground and applies an additional force
acting on the objects and those forces
are going to try and push the objects
apart make sense yeah okay how does it
do that turns out that it's actually
tricky to get that right to make the two
objects hitting one another and then
bouncing off one another trying to
simulate that accurately is actually
very difficult and requires a lot of
computational effort and as you Rec from
last class we just talked about the fact
that at a given time step in a physics
engine your physics engine might have to
be resolving a lot of contacts so it's
in the physics engine's uh best interest
to try and simulate this collision and
rebound uh as accurately but also as
quickly as possible so um in in pet when
we have links connected by joints do
they one thing I notic is sometimes
they'll like fold into each other yes is
areion just never accounted for great
point so all physics engines are
accurate none of them are perfect and
you can already see one obvious
approximation we're making in the
programming assignment so far which you
have these two cubes attached by a
rotational joint which means that the
physics engine is ignoring collisions
between these cubes because by
definition they're always colliding at
every time step the problem with that uh
ignoring those collisions is depending
on how they rotate they can literally
rotate into one another which is very
physically
inaccurate if you want what you can do
with that when you uh at the beginning
of your final project you can add in
some details to clean that up and fix
that and we'll come back to that at some
point okay all right so what does it
what do most physics engines do they
detect a collision and they know more or
less where the Collision has occurred so
in this case the physic physics engine
knows it's around here why am I saying
around here in order for the physics
engine to detect exactly where a
collision is occurring between Pairs of
objects is computationally intensive so
the physics engine most physics Eng
engines cheat at this point they know
more or less where the Collision has
occurred and they sprinkle a whole bunch
of uh points into that region
and at each of these points for one time
step and one time step only the physics
engine creates a
joint remember that when we talked about
joints uh last week we talked about the
fact that joints restrict the relative
motion of pairs of objects my elbow
joint restricts this particular body
part for moving that way while this body
part stays here different kinds of
joints
restrict the relative motions between
Pairs of objects in particular
ways contact joints you'll notice
there's some mentions of contact joints
here some mentions of contact joints
back here contact joints are different
from hinge joints so joints there's a
whole bunch of different kinds of joints
hinge joints are rotational joints ball
and socket joints uh uh piston joints
that cause two pairs of cylind
or rectangular solids to move relative
to one another but not rotate relative
to one another lots of different kinds
of joints this particular kind of joint
the contact joint is temporary at each
point the physics engine is temporarily
kind of welding these objects together
or is going to apply forces that cause
them to accelerate this object is going
to accelerate away from this point and
this object is going to
uh accelerate away from this point these
pairs of objects are also temporarily
connected by this contact joint as well
so this cube is going to accelerate away
from this point this cube is going to
accelerate away from this point yeah
okay in most physics engines if you want
to get down under the hood you can set
the number of contact joints that are
spread by the physics engine into this
estimated region of interpenetration
where these objects are either touching
or already starting to collide the more
points you allow the physics engine to
sprinkle the more accurately it's going
to uh resolve collisions between objects
and figure out how they should rebound
away from one another but it's going to
cost you it's
computationally uh it's it's
computationally
intensive okay couple other details
about Collision resolution there's some
other uh there's some other parameters
that are being set here called mu and
bounce you can set for these contact uh
joints which are restricting relative
motion of the points they're applying
forces that cause these objects to
decelerate and rapidly accelerate away
from one another you can set the exact
way that these forces are applied to
simulate different kinds of
collisions imagine two rubber balls
coming into contact with one another now
imagine two steel ball bearings coming
into contact with one another two two
pairs of objects imagine they have
exactly the same shape size and
mass given their material properties one
pair are rubber balls the other are
steel ball bearings the way in which
they're going to rebound from one
another is very different and you can
get down into the engine room of a
physics engine and play around with that
as always all of these nitty-gritty
details are hidden from
you okay Collision detection and
resolution is a tricky business there's
some things that can go wrong what do
you think can go wrong given what we've
talked about given the details of
collision detection resolution we've
talked about so far what could go wrong
I mean I kind of just think about
doesn't a sphere only really ever make
contact at one point do do do pairs of
approaching spheres only ever Collide at
one point great
question in reality in this physical
Universe yes in a physics
engine I see Nate shaking his head no
why
not because you have to get so
everything is divided into discreete
slices and so you know the chances that
you capture the exact moment where the
two spars are just kissing it's un likee
absolutely a little too late sure
remember that regardless of the physics
engine you're using in a physics engine
time moves forward in discrete moments
and that discreete uh updating of time
has huge repercussions for everything
that happens in a physics engine
including collisions we've got two
objects that are moving towards one
another but the positions of those of
those two pieces are teleporting
actually a short distance during each
time step when you run the jpeg or you
run the simulation uh you don't see it
right it looks like Smooth motion but
like old time uh movies there's actually
discrete frames it's your eye that's
tricking you into thinking that there's
continuous Motion in the physics engine
there isn't which means as Nate
mentioned you can have objects that are
at time step T just separated but at
time step t+ one they are now
overlapping by some amount and the
physics engine is not always exactly
sure what that amount is again with two
spheres it will sprinkle a whole bunch
of contact points into that space I saw
there was a question I just want to
uh cycle back for a moment to contact
joints one detail that I mentioned
contact joint uh contact joints are the
one and only type of joints which are
temporary the physics engine creates
them during one time step the physics
engine using f equals ma uses those
contact joints to apply additional
forces that push the objects away at the
next time step during which all of these
contact points are deleted again yeah
tempor joints question
I simulation does that that accumulate
over simulation absolutely it means that
errors accumulate over a physical
simulation because we're updating time
in a discreete manner right you you're
trying to simulate steel ball bearings
which in the real world absolutely do
not ever interpenetrate right they
absolutely only come into contact with
one another at a single dimensionless
point and it's at just that point that
forces act to push them apart it's hard
to get that just right in a simulation
which means two objects that you're
trying to simulate in a physics engine
that have ve that are very very rigid
that the the way in which they move
apart again after a collision is not
going to be accurate which means errors
can start to accumulate absolutely how
do we rain back in that error
accumulation do you think in a physics
engine you you modify the amount of like
physical time that passes for each
absolutely so we mentioned a while back
that there are a number of time scales
that we need to juggle when we're
running a physical simulation one of
those time scales is simulation time the
amount of time that elapses in the
virtual world between one time step and
the next and in most physics engines you
can set that time step if you set it to
0.1 that means 0.1 seconds of time
elapses from one time step to the next
if you make that number very small
0.001 you still have a discret simulator
but it's discreet like this rather than
discreet like this so why not just set
the time step really really really
really really
low
expensive it's computationally expensive
so everything that goes Mo most things
that go on in robotics that involve
physical simulation and modern video
games they're trying to strike a very
careful balance between physical realism
so that errors don't
accumulate and ensuring that the
simulation doesn't take longer than the
lifetime of the universe to run hard
actually in practice to get these things
right okay so errors accumulate based on
the discreet nature of time in a physics
engine how else can errors come in there
ultimately because of this discret
nature but what are the other things
that can go wrong when you're simulating
two objects that are moving quickly
towards one another for
example I me if we're moving quickly and
the simulation
time each other that's exact L the
question answer that I was going for
let's imagine you're going to simulate
two bullets that have been shot at one
another you set the time step pretty low
because you've got very high velocity
moving objects but they're still doing
this you can get into a situation in a
physics engine where the two bullets do
this then this then this then this then
this there was no Collision detection
and resolution the objects never
approached one another or they never got
close enough for Collision resolution so
you often need to think carefully about
not just not just the physical world but
what's going on in that physical world
are some things moving a lot faster than
others what if you've got slower moving
objects but they're really really really
really
small same issue right even if they're
moving like this but they're teeny tiny
there's a good chance that they could
miss one another and you've got some
significant errors that are going to
start to accumulate in your physics
engine
okay none of this is probably going to
be relevant for your actual projects but
just to give you a sense for some of the
challenges in simulating robots and
their environments
accurately okay mate you've already seen
some examples where one object ends up
embedded NE and kind of flings itself
off yep like practically speaking is
that ever really a problem or is that
close enough to realistic Behavior
usually that
yeah it's a huge problem so if you've
got parts of the robot that are
interpenetrating and uh forces are being
applied for the physics engine to pull
them apart and they're flying off none
of that has a counterpart in reality if
you don't notice that that's happening
and you try and take your evolved robot
and instantiate it as a physical robot
you're not going to cross the reality
gap which we're going to spend a fair
bit of time in this course talking about
in about a month's time how do you
ensure that what evolution did in
simulation transfers to reality very
hard to get this right still a very
active area of
Investigation okay let's push on okay I
think we've said enough about that um
okay all right next thing we're going to
do uh we have our list our usual list up
here of all of the bits and pieces we
want to build into our uh build into our
robot links the parts that make up the
robot joints that connect links together
uh sensors and
Motors sensors Motors neurons and
synapses as I mentioned before
everything above this line is the
responsibility of the physics engine and
we've just finished talking about most
of those pieces in the physics engine
after today's quiz you can safely forget
all of these nitty-gritty details what
you're going to be doing uh in the
sensors assignment and forward is adding
additional stuff on top of what comes
out of the box with the physics engine
to allow it to simulate a robot a
physical simulator is not a robot
simulator at least not out of the box
you got to add additional things so how
do we add sensors every sensor that you
might add to your robot in this course
you're going to do so by exploiting
stuff that the physics engine is already
calculating
let's start with one of the simplest uh
sensors that are found in most robots
these are touch sensors or bump sensors
so I've got a sensor in this part of my
body that this touch sensor is not
firing now it's firing now it's firing
now it's not firing now it's firing and
so on so if I want to simulate a touch
sensor I could start adding additional
code on top of the physics engine to
look to see whether this object collides
with any other object it would be an
extremely stupid thing to do because the
physics engine is already doing this for
us it's already detecting when pairs of
objects touch one another so if you dive
into some of the pyrro SIM code which is
this additional code I've given you that
sits on top of pybullet pybullet is the
outof the- box physics engine we're
using in this course py bullet is some
additional code that I wrote that's
hiding some of these details from you
one of the things that pyrosim is hiding
uh from you is simulating sensors
pyrosim is dipping in to the contact
points that the physics engine has
already strewn within the volume of
pairs of objects that are in Collision
during this time
step and we're then pyrosim is writing
some additional code uh that is looping
through each of these contact points and
looking to see if any of these contact
points are
associated with the desired link if you
say there's a touch sensor in this link
but not a touch sensor in this link this
piece of code runs during every time
step of your
simulation this piece of code is looking
at contact points and if it finds a
contact Point that's inside a link
that's supposed to be simulating a touch
sensor it sets something to one so it's
simulating that sensor for you so we're
exploit pyro Sim is exploiting stuff the
physics engine is already doing to
simulate in this case a touch
sensor question so does that mean that
the touch sensor only lights up for like
one frame or is it just like it will
just like keep finding the new contact
point if things haven't bounced apart
yeah good point so the only thing pyro
Sim will do for you is detect that the
touch sensor has turned on there's a
there's a collision that's occurred and
it's returning that value to you what
you do with that is up to you you might
want to you might want to simulate a
touch sensor that fires and then
immediately turns back off
again a lot of the a lot of the tactile
uh sensation in your skin actually walks
works like this right there is press
pressure on your back and your Underside
right now but you're usually not aware
of it you're usually aware of it for the
first tenth of a second in the moment
you sit in the chair and then it kind of
goes away again right so maybe you want
to simulate a touch sensor that works in
that way or you want to simulate a touch
sensor that stays on as long as the
object is in contact with some other
object it's up to you right pyrosim is
just trying to provide additional
information for you and what you do with
it is up to you was there another
question here nope okay all
right okay so uh I'm going to just pause
for a moment and I want to put all of
this stuff together so you can see how
this works again this is old C code from
the physics engine we used to use in
this course but it should look more
relatively familiar to you now we have
uh we have this inner loop here called
simulation Loop this simulation Loop is
running a number of sub routines and in
your case these number these sub
routines are sitting inside this for
Loop that you created all the way back
in uh assignment one so you got a for
Loop somewhere that's looping uh a
thousand times each time it executes an
instance of that loop it's simulating
one instance of time in over a thousand
time steps in your simulation yeah so
what actually is going on during each
time
step in open uh OD you would actually
see this again in pi bullet this is
hidden from you the first thing the
physics engine does is look to see if
anything is uh colliding with one
another and sprinkling these uh
temporary contact joints between Pairs
of colliding
objects every physics will then step the
world and step the world is shorthand
for go to each object look at all of the
linear and rotational forces acting on
that object update that object's linear
and rotational acceleration and use
those linear and rotational
accelerations to update the position and
orientation of that object then go to
the next object do the same thing and do
that for each object in the simulation
which steps the world what's 0.05 here
do you
think discreet time step the discrete
time step so in this particular
simulation the coder is telling the
physics engine step the
physics by 0.05 seconds all right okay
next thing OD does now that the world
has been stepped is throw away any
temporary contact joints if any were
made and assuming the graphics window is
turned on draw the current state of the
world for the Observer and then rinse
and repeat one thing you can do if you
haven't done this already is you can
start to run your physical simulator in
headless mode headless mode is uh is
slang for turn off all the graphics
again remember that there are multiple
uh there are multiple kinds of time
unrolling in a physical simulation there
is simulation time time 0 time 0.05
seconds time1 seconds and so on when you
render the world that's going to slow
things down because your your your
computer has to actually draw the
graphics so you might actually watch the
frames the visual frames one after the
other depending on the speed of your
computer those frames may be appearing
on your screen faster than
0.05 or if you have a very complex
simulator with thousands of links and
Joints each frame may actually be drawn
in more than
0.005 seconds yeah that's Graphics time
and again you're sitting there and
watching that then we've got wall clock
time as well three different kinds of
time that are unrolling during a
simulation okay all good
okay all right so let's keep going we're
going to we're going to put together uh
a cartoon example where we're going to
put all of these things sensors Motors
neurons and synapses on top of a virtual
robot for those that have already got to
the synapses assignment my apologies
this is going to be a little remedial
for those that haven't got there yet
this is a bit of a preview for where
you're going let's assume a very simple
physical simulation that's only in two
dimension
we have a two-legged robot here with a
front leg and back leg and a main body
and there is some object that is out
here uh in its
environment this little black dot and
white dot are meant to represent two
touch sensors so we've got one touch
sensor in this object and one touch
sensor in this object and as we just saw
we're going to simulate these touch
sensors by piggybacking on top top of
the Collision detection and resolution
that the physics engine is already doing
so far so good we're just setting the
stage for a moment okay okay what if
we've got our touch sensors here let's
add in just to practice let's add in one
additional uh sensor which is a light
sensor or a photo sensor remember
vehicle uh brenberg vehicle 2A and 2B
the coward and the aggressor that we're
detecting light levels let's say you
want to simulate a photo sensor in your
simulation and we're going to assume
that this external object is actually a
light source it's emitting light and
we're going to place this photo sensor
in this particular object up here object
one you can see my code to do this at
every time step I'm going to add in an
additional sub routine that's going to
simulate or update the value of this
photo sensor at that time step you know
in order to do that I want to get the
three-dimensional position of this
object object one get the position of
object one I'm going to get the position
of this particular object out here which
in my numbering scheme is object four so
get the position of object 4 and I'm
going to now compute the light level of
this photo sensor as a function of the
position these two
positions not surprisingly I'm going to
take the ukian distance between
them and then take one over that ukian
distance the smaller the ukian distance
between the light source and the photos
sensor the more strong more light is
falling on the light sensor the bigger
the ukian distance between the photo
sensor and the light source the lower
the light level arriving at the photos
sensor that should all make perfect
sense yes
so we're I again I'm piggybacking on top
of what the physics engine can already
do for me which is tell me what the
current position of this object is and
the current position of this object
is there's an additional detail here I'm
raising the ukian distance to the second
power anybody know why go back to your
high school physics the distance
increases the line
R the light intensity falls off as one
over r s so if I'm looking at this
overhead light and I move twice as far
away from it as I just was the amount of
light falling on my retina drops uh four
times if I move four times away as I was
before from the light source the amount
of light falling on my retina is
116th this is the inverse Square law
it's just physics so I happen to know
that and I'm putting that into my robot
simulator this is just you don't need to
remember the inverse Square law the
reason I'm mentioning this is this is
something that uh roboticists and people
working on physical simulation do all
the time we try and put in additional
details of the physical world so that
ultimately if we evolve this robot to
perform Behavior as a function of the
light falling on the photos sensor and
we take that evolved light sensitive
Behavior take it off the simulated robot
and put it on a physical robot that
operates in the real world where the
inverse uh where the inverse Square law
applies we've got a better chance that
that behavior is going to transfer what
about line of sight or occlusion what
about line of sight or occlusion right
there's nothing in here that simulates
that so if this robot moving around ever
comes if an object ever comes between
the robot and its light
source that evolved behavior is not
going to transfer from simulation to
reality so let's go back in and
elaborate the code that we use to
simulate the amount of light falling on
a light source at every time
step what happens if there's a shadow
that falls on the photo sensor what
happens if there's dust in the air
if we're prototyping a Rover for NASA
there are certain planetary bodies where
there's going to be significant dust in
the air that's going to definitely
affect photos sensors oh my goodness
that is not an easy thing to simulate in
a physics Engine things get increasingly
difficult to simulate very very
quickly one over ukian distance trivial
one line of code inverse Square law of
light trivial one line of code
simulating occlusion not so trivial 10
to 100 to a thousand lines of code
simulating dust and how it influences
photo sensors somewhere to half a
million to a million lines of code
things get really tricky really quickly
um at some point you just like start
looking to use like kind of a mature a
more mature like physics simulation that
like has light already in it absolutely
NASA is in con constant contact with all
the major games companies on the planet
for exactly this reason trust me you do
not want to try and simulate how a Dusty
atmosphere uh influences a photo sensor
but the good people at ID software have
spent millions of person hours and coder
hours simulating how to make sure that
for a virtual camera inside a modern
video game that when there is dust in
the environment it looks realistic and
it turns out that that gets you 99% % of
the way to simulating that it's actually
realistic not 100% but gets you very
close other questions so far so good
Okay so we've got our simple two-legged
robot we've got a light sensor in the
body and touch sensors in the
feet let's add in some Motors now and
again you don't need to memorize or
remember this code here this is C code
from the old physics engine OD but just
to try and drive home this point
remember that a motor uh for our
purposes Motors are always going to be
attached Motors are always going to be
attached to a joint and the motor is
going to send a value to that joint
joint it's the torque the rotational
force that should be applied and forces
act on links so the joint is going to
take that number that torque and send it
to the pair of links that that joint
connects and then the physics engine
takes over from there it updates the
positions and orientations of the links
given that additional force that the
motor is applying to the to the links
through the
joints let's imagine at this particular
point in time at a particular time step
in the physics engine the robot's front
leg is off the ground its back leg is on
the ground we've got a motorized joint
at the shoulder here
and whenever at time Step Zero when a
simulation starts the angle of a hinge
joint is always zero this is a little
confusing and again this is kind of a an
annoying part of physics engines
intuitively it looks like we've got this
body part and this body part that are
attached by a link here you would kind
of think that this angle is maybe
90 doesn't matter what it looks like to
you the moment you create a joint that
attaches pairs of objects together the
current angle of that rotational joint
is
zero if I had created this robot by
placing this front leg out pointing out
into the front of the body out here and
again connected that front leg to the
main body with a
joint the angle of that joint at time
Step Zero of the simulation is zero it's
confusing I know okay we're going to
assume that fact going forward we're
going to assume that as the joint starts
to apply torque rotational Force to the
pairs of objects that it connects
together that the angle of that joint
changes we're going to we're going to uh
assume a particular way of describing
this where extension meaning objects
that rotate out and away from the body
those are going to be uh posit positive
values and flexion meaning rotations of
the joint that cause the cause objects
to move inward towards the body those
are going to be negative numbers so
positive numbers for extension and
negative numbers for flexion it's an
arbitrary convention we're just going to
use it for describing all the different
kinds of robots and physics engines
we're going to see in this class so far
so good okay so at time Step Zero Theta
is zero we're going to tell this
motorized joint that we want this
motorized joint to rotate uh this object
and this object so that this object rot
extends away from the body extension
flexion in towards the body we're going
to tell the physics engine we want to
extend this body part away from the main
Body by
60 it's an arbitrary number for the
moment I just kind of picked this out of
thin air remember a motor has a single
value it's sends that to a motorized
joint in this case a desired angle that
joint takes that desired angle and turns
it into a torque rotational Force that's
applied to the uh the links connected by
that joint okay here that is here's that
in code I am I am coding this up I am
telling this motorized joint I want you
to rotate your pair of links to
60 the the code that follows before
it's got It's got to take this desired
angle and turn it into a torque so it
asks the physics engine what is the
current angle of the joint and it takes
the difference between the desired angle
that I want and the actual angle that
the joint currently has in this C to an
example we're assuming Theta is at zero
we just started the simulation so actual
angle is zero the desired angle is 60 60
minus 0 is 60 the difference between
what I want and what currently exists in
the simulator is
60 in uh OD the code that we're looking
at I would send that difference into uh
into the motorized joint and the physics
engine kind of takes it from there it
figure figures out an appropriate torque
to apply we're going to stop here and
not go deeper into the code so far so
good okay you can imag you can probably
imagine what that torque is there's a
pretty big difference between zero and
60 so it's the physics engine at this
point in time is going to apply
significant rotational Force to try and
get this thing
going okay so it applies some some
torque and at the next time step that
torque remember torque is a force f
equals ma the physics engine uses that
force and the other forces to accelerate
this partic all the all the objects but
we're focusing on this particular object
so this object has now accelerated and
changed its position and orientation
remember physics engines update position
and orientation so now the object is
here and the current angle of this joint
is 20 it was zero and now it's
20 I still want this joint to rotate
this object to 60 degrees extend this
object out 60 degrees away from this
object so far so good okay so if we run
this piece of code a second time during
this new time step the what I want is
still 60 the actual angle is now 20 the
difference is less it's
40 what do you think that does to the
torque reduces it the the torque is less
difference is less so torque is less so
at the next time step time step three
there's a bit of an an error here this
this object should now be ex uh moving
but moving less we're applying less
torque to rotate it to
60 yeah so if this angle was Zero then
it was 20 at this one it's probably like
38 or 39 right it's still accelerating
and rotating outward from the body but
it's slowing down because the motorized
joint is applying less rotational Force
less
torque walk me through what happens over
the next 10 100,000 time steps if this
piece of code stays constant
what happens to the front leg of the
robot asically approaches it asically
approaches right it starts move the leg
starts to kick out in front of the robot
very quickly and very forcefully and
then it starts to slow down and slow
down and slow down until it gets to 60
degrees at that point this difference is
zero the actual angle I want is 60 the
uh sorry the desired angle that I want
is 60 the actual angle is 60 the
difference is zero apply no
torque what happens is this leg is
hanging out in front of the robot at 60
degrees let's test our intuition about
physics engines just wobbles back and
forth it wobbles back and forth why does
it wobble back and forth at one step
it's zero so it'll drop a little bit why
does it drop a little bit because since
it's zero zero torque is being applied
so
gravity remember that there are also
other forces acting on this body like
you just just mentioned gravity is
always pulling it down so it starts to
droop or uh Flex inward again which
increases this difference which causes
the motorized joint to apply rotational
Force to kick it back up again and the
front leg will probably wobble back and
forth yeah so far so good all right
that's uh
Motors
okay we've got sensors we've got Motors
in there now let's connect up the
sensors to the motors with some uh
neurons and synapses so we've got two
touch sensors in this case we're going
to now ignore the photo sensor for a
moment we've got a touch sensor in the
back leg a touch sensor in the front leg
and we're going to just focus on this
one motorized joint at the shoulder
there is another motorized joint back
here at the hip we'll forget that for a
moment we've got two sensors so inside
we're going to build the brain for our
robot we're going to assume it has two
sensor neurons and remember that sensor
neurons just collect values from the
sensors at this point in time the two
sensor neurons are set to one one
because the two touch sensors are
firing we've got one and only uh one one
and only one motor neuron M1 here we've
got one one and we're to continue the
example we just saw we're going to
assume that at time Step Zero the value
that arrives at this motorized this
motor neuron is
60 to keep things really simple we're
going to ignore activation functions
remember that activation functions sit
at neurons and they squash values back
towards some desired range we're going
just ignore activation functions for our
purposes
today what are the synaptic weights here
we've got got two synapses that connect
the two sensor neurons to the one
motorized
neuron 3030 30 30 and 30 let's say Mak
sense right 1 * 30 plus 1 * 30 gives us
60 yeah so assuming we have a three
neuron neural controller for our robot
three neurons and two synapses and the
two weights are 3030 let's imagine we've
got a genotype uh length two we've got a
a vector that contains two numbers the
two synaptic weights and the current
values of that genotype are
3030 that particular pair of synaptic
weights for this robot at time Step
Zero cause the motor to receive a value
of 60 so we're now replacing this
hardcoded code that I put in here
imagine we delete this code and we're
replacing it with a neural network now
the motor neuron
is talking to the motor not my couple
lines of code here so far so good as we
just saw what happens that causes torque
to be applied at the shoulder which
causes the front leg to rotate off the
ground which at the next time step shuts
this touch sensor
off right so in robotics we talk about
sense think act here's
sense 1 + 30 + 1 * 30 = 60 that's the
think sense think and then the ACT is
the uh is the torque that's applied to
the motor which causes a change in the
configuration of the robot so at the
next time step this action has caused
this sensory repercussion the robot has
pushed against its environment and
observed how the world pushes back this
is a situ uated and embodied
agent yeah
okay now the touch sensor values have
changed at this time step the synaptic
weights have not changed we're assuming
that the synaptic weights during these
thousand time steps of the simulation
the synaptic weights stay constant they
don't change the values inside the
neurons are changing from time step to
time step but not the synaptic weights
there's no learning here the strength of
connections between neurons is not
changing over the Thousand EP lifetime
of the robot this is an important
distinction between evolution and
learning when we talk about learning in
this course and usually in robotics in
general learning implies that the
synaptic weights themselves are changing
from one time step to the next in the
simulation of the robot not happening
here no learning we're just assuming
there's some evolutionary process in the
background that has set these two
synaptic weights to
30 turns out that these two synaptic
weights are not actually 3030 they're
something different if these two
synaptic weights don't change and when
these two neurons are one the value
arriving here is 60 when the value of
these two neurons is one Z the value
arriving here is us 990 a number I made
up what are the two synaptic weights
actually absolutely so we know here it's
got to be 1 * x + 0 = - 90 so X has to
be minus 90 so this synaptic weight is
actually minus 90 which means this
synaptic weight has to be 150 1 * -90 is
-90 plus 1 *
150 is 60 kind of arbitrary numbers for
the moment question the
back yes okay learning we have this
robot that's running around in its
physics engine for let's say 1,000 time
steps as you we're just visualizing two
different time steps here time Step Zero
and time step
one and we can see even in this simple
example that the values at the neurons
are changing from one time step to
another we're assuming for this
simplified uh example that the two
numbers sitting on the two synaptic
weights uh minus 90 and
150 we're assuming those two synaptic
weights are the same at the next time
step minus 90 and
150 the synaptic weights are not
changing the strength of connection
between Pairs of ner neurons is not
changing over the 75 minutes that you're
sitting here and having to listen to me
strengths of connections between Pairs
of neurons in your brain are changing
you are learning hooray that's learning
changes in the strength of connection
between Pairs of
neurons over the lifetime of an organism
or in our case a
robot okay all right so uh we've got
minus 90 What's Happening Now what
happens as we keep unrolling this
hypothetical simulation
forward yes so made it like out yes so
it's extended 20 degrees out and then
it's the next so
itus 20 is absolutely so at this
particular time step
the uh current angle of this leg of of
this joint is plus 20 because of what
happened during the previous time step
it's extended out 20 the motorized joint
is saying I want a desired angle I want
a desired angle of minus 90 the
difference between these is 110 or minus
110 we're taking the desired angle and
subtract off the current or actual angle
what happens at the next time step do
you
think it'll like make
contact but with with the ground and so
it'll go back to the first one we've got
we've got a value of minus 110 the diff
a difference of minus 110 being sent to
the motorized joint it's going to apply
a heck of a lot of torque that's a big
difference in flexion minus
always means rotate in towards the body
a positive difference always means
rotate outward away from the body so
there's a lot of rotational Force that's
going to be applied that's going to
crank or Torque that front leg back in
towards the body which means either at
the next time step or at least very soon
this foot is going to come back into
contact with the ground which as you
said means now we're back back to this
situation the moment that front leg
comes into contact with the ground
suddenly the two sensor neurons are
registering one one again and because
we're not changing the synaptic weight
that means that the motorized joint is
going to ask for plus 60 again which
means now torque is going to start to be
applied in the opposite direction is
there any potential it to like kind of
keep swinging through there's also
momentum in a physics engine which we've
kind of ignored for now you're you're
right if there's enough uh torque that
causes the front leg to accelerate
inward towards the body to flex inward
towards the body it might actually hit
the ground and keep going we're glossing
over that detail for the moment so the
leg the front leg started in contact
with the ground rotated out away from
the body suddenly started to rotate back
in again and came into contact with the
ground what happens over the next 10 20
50 100 time steps tell me about the
robot moves it moves
how at some frequency there's an
oscillation in the movement of the robot
when you walk there's an illation most
of the time if you're not in a hurry
it's at about one Hertz yeah where's the
clock in here that's timing this
motion
there uh there is no clock in the
physics engine right it's not actually
timing this
oscillation generated by the phys engine
that creates it's the movement that
creates this oscillation not just the
movement it's everything it's it's the
accelerations and decelerations the
momentum the weight of the leg the uh
the particular neurons and the synapses
the particular weights of the synapses
are all set we've got this sort
complicated system now lots of different
moving pieces that collectively result
in
this if you if I were to hide all of
this in the spirit of Valentino brenberg
from you I didn't tell you anything
that's going on and you just watched the
robot and I asked you how it was doing
what it was doing and you hadn't taken
this course you might give me an answer
like well somewhere inside the robot
there's probably something like a
metronome that's like Counting off and
every time the metronome strikes the
muscles Twitch in the robot and it does
this most of us would tend to attribute
some explicit timer inside the robot but
when we crack this robot
up there's no one home there is no timer
inside remember our discussion about
brenberg vehicles I have emotions inside
I love I hate brenberg doesn't it's just
wires I have free will ins side I have
prospection inside I can close my eyes
and imagine what's going to happen an
hour from now I have retrospection
inside I can close my eyes and remember
what happened on my last birthday it's
all in there I can feel it it's obvious
I have it machines
don't
maybe okay back to physics ents okay all
right that concludes our discussion of
physics engines and tools of the trade
any questions about any of that before
we spend 15 minutes on the very first
years of evolution and robots with that
diagram when the leg swings out with the
robot not just like kind of topple over
there's also that absolutely right so
there's momentum the leg has weight when
it swings out it might actually topple
forward this is obviously a cartoon
example yes lots of other things going
on you probably have a code base set up
at the moment where with about half an
hour of effort you could probably knock
something like this up and try it out
can you set the synaptic weights so that
you get your robot to do this can you
set your synaptic weights so you get it
to do this faster can you set the
synaptic weights to cause it to do this
slower give it a
try is it like more computationally
heavy for a robot to learn than to be
set by evolutionary algorithm that's a
great question so is it more
computationally intensive to get the
robot to learn in uh in addition to or
in opposition to what we're currently
doing which is evolving the weights
setting the weights and letting the
robot do its thing the jury is still out
I'm an evolutionary roboticist I'll tell
you I would guess that in the final
analysis evolution is helpful it's
probably both right we evolve and learn
ultimately when when we create useful
and intelligent and safe machines it'll
probably be some combination of evolving
the structure and the neural controller
of the robot and also allowing the robot
to to learn allowing the robot to change
its synaptic weights as it moves around
in its environment yeah good
question okay all right so onward to uh
our history of the field of evolutionary
robotics the field of Robotics as a
whole just as a reminder has been around
since the end of the second world war
there are many many different schools of
thought thought and uh ways of
approaching Robotics and camps we're
talking about evolutionary robotics uh
in this course evolutionary robotics has
been around
since uh about the early 90s no that's
not what I
want uh so about about 30 years so we're
going to go back and look at two of the
very first evolutionary robotics
experiments uh the first one was
conducted at the epfl uh in Switzerland
by uh uh by an Italian researcher so for
our purposes I'm going to refer to this
as the Italian approach an Italian doing
a scientific experiment in Switzerland a
little confusing we'll just call this
the Italian approach okay how did this
work um this is n uh this is the Kea
robot that they used in this experiment
the experiment was actually carried out
a few years few years earlier there were
some prototypes of this Kea robot that
existed
in the early
9s physics engines did not exist at this
time which means that how are these
experiments going to be carried
out they're going to evolve this
robot in the real world absolutely okay
the Kea robot's about the size of a of a
hockey puck um the nice thing about the
Kea and there are versions of it that
still exist today is it's kind of uh
stackable it's plug and play so you
there's the the sort of drive train
underneath these two motorized uh Wheels
one left and one uh right and you can
stack things on top in this little
grainy picture here they placed a little
gripper on the top and this gripper can
rotate down and close around a sugar
cube and then lift that sugar cube up
over its head sound familiar okay all
right uh nice thing about this hockey H
keer robot is you could perform
experiments with it on a table and it
wouldn't kill anyone if it falls over
you're going to be
okay
okay here are some of two arguably two
of the most uh widely deployed
autonomous robots on the planet at the
moment what's this
one it's the Roomba this is the the one
that that's actually a brush I can't
remember what it's called but yes the
Roomba anyone recognize this
one it's a warehouse bot um used by a
particular
company anybody bought anything from
Amazon the last few days if you've
received a package from Amazon it was
probably moved about it originally that
item that you bought was sitting in one
of these vertical shelves one of these
little orange robots drove underneath
and lifted up the vertical stack and
brought it over probably to a human
worker who then pulled out the item and
put it in your box the Kea not a lot of
people have heard of it it is the great
great grandparent of a lot of the
autonomous robots that are currently
moving about on the planet
okay uh here's a different extension uh
we just saw the gripper uh they're going
to we're going to actually look at it
the first evolutionary robotics
experiment where they put a linear
Vision module on top of the robot not
quite a camera uh it's kind of a very
crudee camera sits on top of the robot
and at every point in time here in the
real world it that little camera returns
30 uh sorry 64 numbers which is the
amount of light falling on these 64
photo receptors so not that different
from a brenberg vehicle and it covers
about
36 uh of coverage in front of the road
robot okay how did they set everything
up no physics engine so they're going to
have to uh apply synaptic weights to the
physical robot let the physical robot
run around on the top of the table for a
few seconds compute the fitness of that
robot go on to the next set of synaptic
weights in the population next set of
synaptic weights next next next it's
going to take a lot of time and a lot of
effort so what they did uh in this case
was to tether the robot to a desktop uh
computer and the computer is going to
run the evolutionary algorithm it's
going to at the beginning generate a
random set of numbers which are the
random weights for the
synapses they're going to the computer
is going to send those synaptic weights
to the
robot I'm sorry I misspoke it doesn't
say here the brain The evolutionary
algorithm is running on the desktop the
brain of the robot is also running on
the
desktop the desktop is going to take
that set of random synaptic weights and
apply it to the synapses of a neural
network that's being simulated on the
desktop they're going to propagate the
sensor value they're going to get the
sensor values back from the robot
through this tether they're going to
plug those sensor values into the neural
network propagate those sensor neuron
values through to the motor neuron
values get those motor neuron values
back turn them into torqus send those
torqus back along the tether to the Keo
robot and those torqus are going to be
applied to the two
wheels so far so good okay all right so
what are the sensors um there's a little
there was a little laser uh up in the uh
Corner uh above the table table and that
laser would Shine Down onto the Kea and
that would allow the Kea or the system
to take that light the laser information
and compute the XY position of the kepra
on the tabletop and Alpha The Heading of
the robot so there are three sensor
values coming in in this hypothetical
experiment x y and Alpha and then the
neural network would say given the
current X Y and Alpha motorized Wheels
move like
this so far so good okay given that
setup what kinds of behaviors could you
evolve for this little hockey puck type
robot maybe like basic navigation a 2d
maze or
something a 2d maze like this one yes
well done okay all right so this is the
arguably the very first evolutionary
robotics experiment ever conducted they
built this simple 2D it's not even a
maze racetrack on the top of a
table remember I told you that there are
these 36 numbers coming into this uh
linear Vision system they put a little
bit of code in place to take those 36
numbers and boil them down into one two
three four five six seven eight
proximity sensors so as this little Kea
is moving around and starts to approach
one of the walls of the racetrack a
light will actually
drop and it uses that drop in light to
approximate proximity how close it is to
a source to to the wall Okay so we've
got actually eight different
sensors and two motorized uh wheels so
the neural network control rer they've
actually drawn it right on top of the
robot might be difficult to see from the
back but we sh we've got our eight uh
sensors these gray boxes and we've got
eight uh sensor neurons the white
circles we've got two Motors here the
white boxes and two Mo uh two motor
neurons which are the two big circles in
the
center eight sens
two Motors every sensor is connected to
every motor neuron how many total
synapses do we
have 16 each of the eight sensors is
attached to each of the two Motors so
imagine a genome which is a vector of
length 16 we need to come up with 16
weights for these 16 synapses which is
what they allowed The evolutionary
algorithm uh to do we're going to assume
that the value that's sent from the
motor neuron to the motorized wheel can
be positive or negative a positive
number is the motor neuron uh trying to
apply torque to the wheel to cause the
wheel to move forward a torque of zero
is causing the wheel to not spin and a
torque of minus5 is causing the wheel to
rotate backwards quickly yeah so the
according to the synaptic weights the
wheels are going to start spinning
forward backwards at various
velocities okay we're going to assume
that the eight proximity sensors are the
values arriving at the sensor neurons
have a Val a floating point value
between zero and one proximity sensor is
going to register a value near zero if
it really can't see anything there is an
obstacle 5 cm or further away clear
sailing as the robot moves around and
starts to approach uh a an object closer
and closer that proximity sensor that's
nearby is going to start firing with a
larger and larger value if that
proximity sensor comes into contact with
the wall of the racetrack that proximity
sensor is going to fire with a maximum
value maximum proximity
one okay if you it might again may be
difficult to see in the back of the room
you might notice that the synapses here
have little uh arrows associated with
them and the sensor neurons that are
attached to the ipsilateral same side
motor neuron have a particular kind of
Arrow associated with them and synapses
that are that connect from a sensor
neuron to a motor neuron
contralaterally like this one have a
different Arrow these two different
Arrow types are representing that some
of these synapses have been set manually
by the researchers to be either
excitatory or
inhibitory so in this experiment the
researchers are coming in and they're
saying listen I have a little bit of an
intuition for what these synaptic
weights should be ipsilateral
connections they should have positive
values whatever those weights are going
to be they should be positive and
contralateral synapses those values
should be negative what the actual
values should be that's going to be up
to the evolutionary algorithm what is
the intuition that the researchers are
drawing on
here you want to move away from sources
of contact you want to move away from
sources of contact so why do excitatory
contralateral excitatory connections
make sense like theel on the
sideward sound familiar where have we
seen this before
brenberg Vehicles was written in 1980 if
I get now five or six right so six or
seven years before this experiment was
done these researchers did their
homework they knew that generally
speaking that's what you want but what
those actual values should be who knows
okay we got one minute left in class so
let's think about how we're going to
select for this Behavior we're going to
evolve vectors of length
16 we need to come up with a fitness
function where as after a few seconds of
the physical robot moving about in this
racetrack we want a function that
returns zero if the robot does the worst
possible job and a one if the robot does
the best possible thing lower values are
going to correspond to worse Behavior
values closer to one represent better
values in this particular experiment the
researchers built their Fitness function
from these 10
variables they're assuming that they're
going to get back from the robot the
speed of the left and right wheel at a
given point in time and the values of
the eight proximity sensors we have 30
seconds left give me a general intuition
how do you combine these 10 variables
you want to fast as possible and then be
those to the brightest so the farest
away from the walls okay you want the
wheel to spin as fast as possible and
you want the proximity sensors to be as
low as possible
great
Fair perverse
instantiation I know that isn't quite
what you meant work on it see if you can
write something down with pen and paper
uh we'll see you on Tuesday you have a
quiz due tonight you're working on some
set of assignments have a good rest of
your week